Fast forward to 2025, you have this
incredibly abrupt
reduction in immigration, and what this
means is that
we really don't have much labor force
growth anymore.
Hi Miriam. Hi Dallas. Well, we've got a
big conversation today about immigration
and the economy. Uh it's something that
obviously is at the forefront of
people's minds politically about the
Trump era
and we've addressed it here and there in
our conversations about the job market,
but we haven't really just head-on
looked at data and talked about how we
should factor this into our economic
forecasting. So, we're going to do that
a little bit later in the show, but
first, of course, we want to check in on
what's going on in the markets.
And the thing that has obsessed everyone
now for a while is the price of oil and
related things, and we're getting a new
lens on how that is filtering through
our economy through
airline earnings reports. This upcoming
week, we've got Alaska, Southwest,
United, and American. And of course,
recently Delta reported. So, Miriam,
what did we learn from from past reports
and and what are you looking for in
these upcoming reports? Well, I think
what's really interesting is that
there's not a one-to-one correlation
with oil prices. Oil prices are an input
into jet fuel, but actually, as our
colleague Allison Sider wrote, jet fuel
prices more than doubled in the weeks
after the start of the
>> Way more than just the price of oil.
>> Way more than just the price of oil. So,
this is really a huge factor for these
airlines, and Allison actually wrote
another interesting story about Delta,
which is
Delta years ago bought a refinery, which
many people thought was kind of a dumb
idea. Like, why would an airline need to
buy a refinery?
>> vertical integration, you know?
>> And they didn't actually pay that much
for it, so maybe it was, you know, worth
it for the price. And what what people
are now saying is maybe that investment
is now paying off
for Delta. The other airlines, however,
don't have hedging programs anymore.
Yeah, which it was actually surprising
to me to learn. I guess it's expensive
to hedge. You got to pay this big option
cost and obviously airlines we know run
run thin margins.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> I I guess that doesn't shock me. But
they are smart. So they've thought of
another way to offset rising jet fuel
prices and that is through extra baggage
fees. All of the airlines pretty much
have rolled out
increased baggage fees. My husband and I
were griping about this just the other
day. We were debating whether to cancel
our Delta Amex and then we decided not
to because actually the annual fee for
the card is less than the amount we'll
save in baggage fees for having this
card [laughter] because now the new
baggage fees are so much more expensive.
So we did we kind of did some math on
our baggage fees. But these baggage fees
are have been put in place to try to
offset the higher cost of fuel. Um but
the thing about these fees, as we know
from history, is
they don't go away when fuel costs go
down.
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> a way this could be good long term for
the airlines. These outlive the the jet
fuel price increase. You're saying
maybe, you know, a year or two from now
we're talking about, oh wow, you know,
actually airlines now look more
profitable. Some are also going to be
cutting capacity because, you know,
obviously the price of tickets for the
summer travel season will be higher
because of this jet fuel increase. So
I'm going to be looking for that on the
earnings calls for these companies.
>> And I think about a couple of
conversations we've had on this show.
One with Natasha Kanerva, the
commodities um research uh person at JP
Morgan and, you know, she talked about
how book your travel now, you know, I
actually took her advice, too. Good.
[laughter] Good. That's good. I didn't
and so therefore didn't travel
uh the other day when I had an
opportunity.
>> And I want to get to that because that
actually leads to another thing I want
to talk about. But first we wanted to
ask the audience, are you bullish or
bearish on airline stocks right now
based on what's going on? Kind of given
this push and pull.
Yeah, based
>> yeah.
Yeah, there's a kind of a push and pull
between higher fuel prices as we've
discussed and higher customer fees. Do
you think this is going to hurt or help
the airlines?
Let us know by sending us an email or a
voice memo to take on the week at
wsj.com.
We may read your answer here on the air.
And if you are a US resident 18 years or
older, you could win some WSJ swag. So,
please send us a note. Um and then
getting to the next point. Well, Here's
a map of the market right now. Delta,
when it reported, despite this jet fuel
surge, its stock went up. Right?
A bunch of other companies in the
consumer spending arena recently
reported and their stocks went down. And
those are luxury companies. Because
while you may not want to give up your
um your travel plans, maybe you could
like put off that Birkin bag a little
>> [laughter]
>> bit longer, right? Like you don't need
that I mean, you know. No. I really
think that that the luxury market is
less tied to the price of oil than other
types of retail. And here's why. If
you're a wealthy person who's buying a
Birkin bag, is a few more dollars at the
pump really going to affect your
spending? I don't think so. And I and I
actually don't think that's why there's
been some softness in the luxury market.
But I do think it is related to the Iran
war.
The Middle East has become a huge uh
area for these luxury companies in terms
of spending. I went to Doha
um last year actually with The Wall
Street Journal for a conference that we
had there. I went to this huge luxury
mall near my hotel and that was like,
you know, filled with people who were
going to buy these super expensive
goods. You can buy them tax-free in a
lot of the Emirates. But right now
people are not going out as much there.
They're probably unsure about the local
economy and they're probably not
spending as much. And those people, the
wealthy people there who, you know,
benefit from the natural resources of
those countries may not be spending at
the level that they once were. And
they're definitely not traveling to
other countries to spend. And by the
way, I just wanted to say specifically
we're talking about reports from Kering,
which owns Gucci. We're talking about
Hermes, of course, LVMH, very familiar
names to people. But But to to your
point about what is it that drives those
companies' performance? Our colleague
Carol Ryan, who writes about this often
for Heard on the Street. If you're
interested in luxury dynamics, I I
highly recommend, you know, putting an
alert on Carol's name. Her stuff is so
smart and interesting. And what she said
is that a lot of these companies, their
fortunes are more much more tied to,
forget the price of oil, like you said,
it's the market. If the stock market is
still doing well,
that is creating wealth for people who
are investors and makes them, you know,
able to spend money on fun stuff like,
you know, a Birkin bag. And the stock
market though, you know, it's had its
ups and downs lately, is still Well, no,
it's it's recently crossed it. What am I
saying? What am I saying? The S&P closed
above 7,000 for the first time
recently. So, the stock market is doing
fine and so therefore luxury companies
will probably
ultimately be okay.
>> her argument was that actually the
pullback in those stocks make them a
buy. But the conversation in the market
this coming week might really center
around something entirely different,
uh but very important, which is the
beginning of the not the hearings for
the nomination of Kevin Warsh to be the
next Fed chair. And uh President Trump
put a little more heat back in that
story when he threatened to fire Jerome
Powell once again.
It came in the context of saying if
Jerome Powell doesn't leave the Fed when
his term ends, which is uh in the middle
of May,
uh there's kind of a race to officially
confirm Warsh ahead of that, but there's
this ongoing
sort of issue with Senator Tillis who's
kind of put a hold on the nomination
until the Department of Justice drops
its investigation of Jerome Powell.
So a lot of drama about you know
how quickly will Warsh's nomination
actually move.
Tillis has said he's been digging in his
heels. He's said you know he's not going
to budge. So there it's really shaping
up to be quite a dramatic standoff.
>> And that's all before like the the
substantive drama around Kevin Warsh
which is that you know he he he has you
know argued that we can and and should
be cutting interest rates recently and
it's becoming harder
arguably to make the case that we should
be cutting rates in the face of the risk
of an oil price shock
but also a really tough to read labor
market. Right? Because that's why the
Fed you know often seeks to cut rates is
because it feels like the job market is
weak. It's been really hard to decipher
I think what's going on with the jobs
numbers in the employment reports. So
we've seen huge gains, huge declines,
big revisions yet a steady unemployment
rate. And you know we really wanted to
unpack that a little bit more.
>> it's been tough for Wall Street even
like the Journal had this really
interesting story about how how Wall
Street forecasters like the economists
who predict have been whiffing on their
predictions lately and you know maybe
maybe you're you're cynical and you're
like oh what do those people even know
but they're usually actually pretty good
at predicting those things and and
they've been they've been missing a lot
lately. So if you feel confused you are
not alone. Yeah. But to get into one
theory on why this is happening we spoke
with economist Wendy Edelberg. She's a
non-resident senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution.
>> Big think tank. A big think tank. And a
principal at consulting firm WestExec
Advisors. And she's been looking at how
these numbers have been impacted by
changes in immigration policy. We have a
really fascinating conversation with
Wendy coming up in a bit.
>> [music]
>> Welcome back, Wendy. Hello. Great to
have you. I'm delighted to be here. So,
whenever there's a jobs report, the
headline is always the job creation or
loss number. Right? That's what gets
written about, talked about on TV, etc.
But you've been saying that actually the
most important number that you can look
at in the jobs report these days,
particularly, is the unemployment rate.
Why is that? Well, certainly I think
it's the most informative number if
you're trying to compare this jobs
report to past jobs reports. So, we have
a sense of what a good unemployment rate
is and what a bad unemployment rate is.
And that does change over time for
various reasons, but roughly speaking,
history is a decent guide for what's
good and what's bad in the unemployment
rate space.
Not true with employment growth because
it turns out what's happening right now
with immigration
is driving the employment growth numbers
in a way that makes these reports that
we're getting today and, you know, in
the in these months,
it's just not comparable to reports we
were getting in 2024
before the pandemic.
Uh and so that those numbers are now
very hard to interpret. So, we've swung
from basically a very open-door policy
under the Biden administration to a
almost completely closed-door policy
under the Trump administration. Correct.
That's right. In fact, with colleagues,
we estimate that in 2025, we very likely
had negative net migration for the first
time in many decades.
Where do these numbers come from? How do
How do we determine that? Yeah, so it's
harder to estimate than you might think.
We do a decent job as a country of
measuring how many people are coming
into the US, though even that's
complicated because as we knew in 2022,
2023, 2024, people come into the US
totally undetected by the immigration
system. So, we even need estimates for
those numbers. We actually do a very
poor job of estimating how many people
leave the United States in any given
year. And so, so really
we always just have estimates of net
immigration. Even if I talked you about,
you know, what net immigration was in
1990, like even back then like we just
don't have precise estimates. So, we
have to cobble these together from
uh official data sources and some from
surveys and just doing our own analysis.
>> Now, sometimes the Trump administration
will give numbers for, you know, ICE has
deported this number of people. Um
are those really reliable numbers? Like
is that part of the benchmark? Are you
looking at other statistics to sort of
double-check that? Certainly we are
looking carefully at the numbers that
ICE reports.
Uh I want to distinguish that from
numbers that the Trump administration
touts. Adding two numbers together that,
you know, where where there's just
obvious double counting, that sort of
thing. But, we're certainly looking
carefully at the numbers that are being
reported by ICE, that are being reported
by the Customs and Border Protection.
And then there are some survey numbers
that are reported by uh the BLS and
Census and stuff like that. Getting back
to the employment report. What does this
mean for how we understand job growth in
the US? Cuz that's really what you've
been, you know, sort of Last year you
wrote a big paper about that. You came
back to it this year as well.
What is
What should we know about that? When you
think about what is a good employment
number and what's a bad employment
number,
you want to compare that to how many
people month in and month out are
showing up and trying to get work.
>> Mhm. And if the amount of job creation
keeps up with the number of people
showing newly showing up and saying they
want jobs, then that keeps the
unemployment rate low and pretty stable.
We call that rate of employment growth
the break even. It's basically a steady
as she goes, this is a strong labor
market kind of employment growth number.
Yeah. And in
2022 to 2024, that number skyrocketed
in the face of immigration, going from
maybe 75,000 to 100,000 a month to
200,000 a month.
>> Meaning the economy had to create that
many jobs just to keep up with the
number of people who were entering the
labor force. Yes, indeed. And in fact,
it did. In fact, we had very strong
employment growth in those years. And
then fast forward to 2025,
you have this incredibly abrupt
uh reduction in immigration, and what
this means is that
we really don't have much labor force
growth anymore.
And so the number of people who are
showing up and wanting jobs in any given
month is basically the same this month
as it was last month, and it's going to
be the same next month.
And that means that we basically need
employment not to grow
just to stay stable. Mhm. And so
our estimates are that here now in 2026,
that break even employment growth number
might be roughly around zero.
So that when I open up the newspaper or
open up my laptop and see in the
employment report that
uh employment for the last 3 months was
maybe zero.
I'm like, that's that's actually a
pretty good number given what's
happening with labor supply growth. And
that's a big change because it used to
be, I mean, you know, for the years I've
been doing this job here at the Journal,
like 50 was like a bad report, right?
That was kind of what you were taught
was like, "Oh, that's the number that
the markets aren't going to like."
>> Yep.
>> Yep. Now, of course, we've had we've had
a lot of volatility in those numbers.
And the Journal had an interesting story
about how forecasters have kind of been
whiffing more often on their forecasts.
But you're saying that like we just need
to recalibrate what's a good number and
what's not. Yeah, so
you know, we we have to put March aside
a little bit. March was a very strong
employment number. There are a handful
of reasons to discount that, but
nonetheless, it's a good number. I'll
take a good number. I'm happy with a
good number. But if you look even with
that good number in mind, employment
growth on average of the last 6 months
was like,
you know,
in the
low double digits.
Um so we're talking about uh even with
that strong number in hand, maybe 15,000
a month on average. And that's a really
low number and
there's cognitive dissonance
seeing a string of low numbers like that
alongside
a pretty good unemployment rate. 4.3%.
That's a you know,
particularly in the context of history,
4.3% is a great unemployment rate and
it's it's hard if you have history in
mind.
>> Mhm. It's hard to put those things
together.
>> Like the market still doesn't quite know
how to interpret this. I really think
that the market's confused and I think
actually
economists, people like me, observers
who have been thinking about the labor
market for a long time are also
confused. It's
it's
hard to wrap your head around the fact
that a very low employment growth number
might reflect a healthy labor market.
In essence, we're becoming Japan. So, I
take your point about the unemployment
rate and why that's telling us something
different from what the the the job
creation and growth numbers are and is
impacted by what's happening with the
population.
But, why are we seeing such some months
of relatively tepid job growth, right?
Because I understand that you're taking
people out of the population, so
therefore the the pool of people who are
working is staying the same, but why
aren't companies hiring as much? Is that
also related to immigration policy?
Maybe the best way to explain this is to
describe my thinking in late 2024,
uh when the presidential campaign was
was going on and now President Trump was
talking about what he wanted for
immigration policy and how he wanted to
restrain immigration policy. So,
certainly the theory of his case was
that
we were going to reduce the number of
immigrants that were in the United
States. Labor demand would stay strong.
That would push up wage growth and it
would bring people in off the sidelines.
So, there were a couple of reasons why I
didn't believe in 2024 that that would
happen.
At least to the degree that they were
describing. So, one is that immigrants
spend money.
Immigrants, when they
work in the United States and they get
an income, they spend almost all of that
income in the United States and the
companies that are providing all of the
goods and services that they're spending
their money on in turn need to hire
people. Mhm. So,
there was no reason to believe that with
drastically less immigration, we would
still have the same labor demand that we
would have had otherwise. That was that
just didn't make sense.
>> Because companies will right-size for
the opportunity. Exactly. So, if you're
in a community that is largely made up
by immigrants and net migration turns
negative, you are probably going to see
fewer people coming into your grocery
store. You're going to see
uh fewer people in your schools, which
means we need fewer teachers in those
schools.
>> Mhm. And so, fewer humans means both
sides of this that equation go down.
The other reason that I didn't believe
just
pausing for a second on on the theory of
the case that the Trump administration
was trying to make,
is because even if then labor demand had
stayed high, which
arguably it it could have to some
degree. I mean, these were very abrupt
changes.
>> Mhm.
The wage growth that would have resulted
would never have been enough to pull all
these folks in off the sidelines.
>> Interesting.
Uh we have no historical evidence to
suggest that modestly higher wage growth
is going to get all these prime-age men
to come into the labor market when for
some reason they haven't been working.
It would have to be so much higher and
you couldn't produce that.
>> Yeah, I mean,
it would just it would be a a complete
structural change of the US economy. All
right, we're going to take a quick break
and when we come back, we're going to
continue talking with Wendy Edelberg
about immigration and employment and
also get to the Fed. What does the Fed
have to do with all this?
>> [music]
>> How much of what is happening with with
the workforce is reversible or or have
we just seen a permanent change that
unless we then switch our immigration
policy in the future But even with a
switch, like if a Democratic
administration comes in and says, "You
know what? Forget it, we're going back
to the Biden policy." Will people be
willing to come back out into the broad
light of day and boldly work again?
>> [laughter]
>> I mean
life is long.
So, eventually.
>> You know, eventually. There are couple
of aspects of what's of of this of this
current policy that I think will be
persistent. We have shown ourselves
pretty amenable to
really
aggressive enforcement against our
immigrant population. And you can't
unring that bell.
>> Mhm. And and so, I do think there's a
persistent effect of
immigrants going forward thinking
"Are there alternatives to the US?" And
I'm talking about everyone from you
know, a college student to somebody who,
you know, might have been eligible for
an H-1B visa to a refugee. Um anyone
reasonably will now think
uh "What alternatives do I have to to
the United States?" And we have this
deep literature that this is one of our
sources of productivity growth. This
means
fewer immigrant entrepreneurs. This
means fewer immigrant inventors. And so
I I think I think we have we have
hobbled ourselves in terms of
productivity growth for a long time to
come.
Well, of course, immigration is not the
only thing affecting our workforce,
right? You have artificial intelligence,
which is something that will make the
existing number of people more
productive? At least in theory. At least
in theory. Uh you also have a
retirement, right? You mentioned Japan.
Japan
part of what explains their sort of low
population growth is is the graying of
their society. And we have peak 65,
people retiring in this country.
How do those things all net out with
what's happening with immigration? One
of the reasons why immigration has been
so important in the United States is
because of our demographic challenges.
We've had an aging population for a
while now.
>> Okay. So that's not new. It's not the
first time that we've
>> a low birth rate. And a low birth rate.
And
uh
having immigrants come in who are
generally speaking of the age where they
want to work and they have a high
propensity to want to work
helps to has helped for a long time to
bulk up our labor force in the face of
all of these demographic challenges.
And that's matter for our economy, but
but actually a place where it's even
mattered perhaps more isn't terms of
fiscal policy.
>> [snorts]
>> We have organized our federal fiscal
policy around depending on immigrants
who pay a whole lot in federal taxes as
workers.
And
our federal government is pretty capable
of denying them benefits.
Uh sometimes for a handful of years,
sometimes
forever.
And so
what has helped our
fiscal trajectory, which is to say what
has helped to reduce federal borrowing,
uh is our immigration policy. And we are
obviously undoing that, and that's going
to make our fiscal challenges worse.
Before we get to the Fed, I do want to
just
ask about AI and
we talked on the show before about with
within the context of retirement that,
you know, as there are fewer people
working, if we are becoming more
productive, right? We're worried about
AI is going to mean that there's aren't
there aren't jobs for people. But maybe
if there are just fewer people working,
it sort of nets out. Is it possible that
AI could
mean that the removal of people from the
working population through immigration
policy
kind of is what the economy needs in a
way. So, there aren't people who want to
work but can't because of technology. I
am actually not an AI pessimist. I think
there's a decent chance that AI wildly
drives up the demand for labor in some
aspects. We figure something out. We
figure out, "Oh my gosh, we need so much
more investment on this following front,
and we need a whole bunch of people to
do that investment, and there we have
labor demand." So, I
I'm actually not a huge pessimist, but I
don't think that it it doesn't it
doesn't work to have an economy
to just have fewer and fewer and fewer
people every year, so that at the end
result, you have one guy in a big AI
machine. Like, that's just not an
economy. [laughter] So, it can't be that
the way to solve this problem is just to
have fewer and fewer people every year.
The Fed is expected to or has been
expected up until recently to lower
interest rates this year. But based on
what you're saying about the
unemployment rate being the thing that
we should be looking at, is that still
something that the Fed should be doing
with the data that's available?
Let's talk about 2025. So, in 2025,
employment growth was month-after-month
falling, it seemed like.
And yet, the unemployment rate seemed to
be doing okay.
A bunch of Fed officials talked about
how they were
worried that those declines in
employment were going to
get too much momentum to them.
And then we were going to find ourselves
with too weak employment and a rising
unemployment rate.
>> Mhm.
I was I mean, not that it really matters
what I think about monetary policy, but
since you asked,
>> [laughter]
>> I thought, okay, fine. That kind of
makes sense to me. I mean, it's true. Uh
declines in employment can, you know, we
can get those can take on a life of
their own and we don't want employment
to keep falling forever and ever and
ever uh and you know, turn more and more
negative. Um so, I saw reasons to cut
just to take out some insurance.
But I think
we are clearly now in a place where
employment growth is keeping up with
labor force growth.
And
I don't see a reason to cut in the face
of this. But I I do think that there are
really smart folks who have been
thinking about the labor market for
really long time, who are looking at
these employment growth numbers
and they're just worried.
They're worried that uh that these
numbers are weak and alarming. And uh
you know, it's Look, it's possible that
they're right and I'm wrong, but I look
at these numbers and I say, these are
the numbers you get when you have very
little labor force growth.
>> Mhm.
Well, it just it does seem like whatever
the conversation is going forward that
like you the the term you brought up
before the break-even, how many jobs
need to be created? I mean, expectations
do seem to be changing around that.
Jerome Powell has talked about maybe
it's zero. Um the Council of Economic
Advisers, which works for the president,
they had a new report recently that also
acknowledged it might be, you know, zero
or or you know, very low. So so it does
seem like
you know, you you you've helped drive
the conversation about the baseline
being something new. Mhm. I
agree.
>> [laughter]
>> But but but there's still confusion
here. So for example, so for example,
some people have written about the fact
that the labor force feels fragile
in that the only place where we're
seeing consistent employment gains is in
health care.
And employment outside of health care
has been generally negative.
But that is again a misunderstanding
of what employment is going to look like
if total aggregate employment is
basically the same month after month
after month after month. If total
employment is the same month after
month, then sectors that are just on
trend growing
are going to be the ones that have
positive employment gains. And that
means the other sectors have to have
negative employment gains. So we're
being too
driven by what's on either side of the
number zero
and thinking, "Oh, if we only have
positive gains here and negative gains
there, there's the the
the labor market is fragile and it's and
and it could it could break." Um when in
reality, I don't know, it's just math.
It's just something we all have to get
used to thinking about in a new way. I
mean, and if we want to stick with this
immigration policy, yes, and in fact, I
mean, I think the numbers are going to
keep going down. Like like I mean, it
could be negative that rate, right?
>> be negative. And as much as like we're
having this conversation of like
okay, zero. I can get it. It's okay.
[laughter]
Zero. Negative would really break
people's brains.
So so like let's let's talk again in 6
months when the numbers are negative
month after month after month and people
are like, "Wait, no that Now this has to
be bad."
>> Right. All right, well, let's let's
>> again for two I love that. We'll be
back. We'll be back.
>> joining us, Will.
>> You're welcome. This was fun.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Guys, can we just can we just wrap this
real quick? We have
>> [laughter]
>> Is the backup guest waiting?
Are they still here?
>> [music]